The Department of Computer Science and Engineering at The Chinese University of Hong Kong is the first Computer Science department in Hong Kong. The University has been offering computer courses since 1968. In 1970, the Joint Universities Computer Centre (JUCC) was established and an ICL 1904A computer was installed in the University as a joint facility for the two local universities. In line with the increased demand for trained computer personnel, the Department of Computer Science was established in the Science Faculty in the academic year of 1973/74. A minor programme in Computer Science was then implemented and the response was overwhelming. From 1971 to 1975 the Department also offered a one-year postgraduate diploma course in System Analysis.
The Department launched its undergraduate major programme in Computer Science leading to the BSc degree in 1978. The Postgraduate Division was established in 1982. In 1983, the Computer Science major programme became the first one outside the United Kingdom to be accredited by the British Computer Society (BCS). When the Faculty of Engineering was founded in 1991, the Department joined the new Faculty and started to offer an undergraduate major programme in Computer Engineering leading to the BEng degree. The name of the Department was changed to Department of Computer Science and Engineering in 1995.
Since its founding, the Department has expanded rapidly in enrollment, curriculum, staff, equipment, research and services to the community, in both quality and quantity. Currently, the Department offers programmes leading to BSc, BEng, MSc, MPhil and PhD degrees. The Department has the most advanced computing equipment and cloud infrastructure for both Computer Science and Computer Engineering research. The Department consists of over 30 faculty members, including 1st Turing Award recipient in Hong Kong, 7 ACM Fellows, 13 IEEE Fellows and a student body of 1035 students. The Undergraduate Division includes 430 students in the Computer Science major programme, 120 in the Computer Engineering major programme, 80 in the Artificial Intelligence: Systems and Technologies major programme, 70 in the Computer Science minor programme and 5 in the Web & Cloud Computing minor programme. The Postgraduate Division contains about 130 MSc students and 200 full-time research students, carrying out research in a very co-operative and friendly environment. Graduates from the Department have distinguished themselves in industrial and academic societies in Hong Kong as well as all over the world.
The Computer Science programme (CS) was launched by the Department of Computer Science and Engineering in 1978.  The primary goal of the Computer Science programme is to prepare graduates to understand the field of computing and engineering with a global view of both the academic discipline and profession. The programme strives to achieve this through broad and coherent coverage of the computer science disciplines by exposing our students to the basic theories as well as to advanced high-level concepts and system integration skills. We also expect our students to be sympathetic to ethical, professional and societal issues associated with information technologies. The programme prepares our students to be independent thinkers who possess good problem-solving skills, the ability to learn independently and the desire for life-long learning.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is an emerging engineering discipline that focuses on the technological innovations in enabling computing systems to behave and discover new knowledge with human-like intelligence. It is a broad area that covers many specializations, such as machine learning, deep learning, knowledge representation/inference, large scale computing systems and distributed systems, logic/constraint programming, human-computer interactions, natural language processing, big data analytics, etc. It has evolved in multiple disciplines, such as finance, medicine, manufacturing, robotics, multimedia, telecommunications, computational linguistics, etc., and there is now a huge demand of AI specialists in both local and global employment markets. On the other hand, there are critical challenges on how to innovate and design solid and rigorous solutions for AI, as well as how to properly address the ethical and societal issues with AI.
The AIST programme is designed to meet today’s tremendous need of well-trained talents in AI and related specializations. It aims to equip students with the capabilities of designing and implementing AI systems and technologies that can analyze, reason, and infer knowledge from massive information, backed by rigorous foundations of mathematics, basic sciences, data structures, statistics, algorithms, distributed computing, etc. Such capabilities enable students to develop cutting-edge AI solutions that are of practical interest to academia, industry and society.
Note that the AIST programme aims to admit high caliber students who demonstrate outstanding abilities in English, mathematics and science subjects. Excellent academic backgrounds, together with a problem-solving mindset, will be essential to comprehend the knowledge and tackle the future challenges with AI.
The Computer Engineering (CE) Programme was established when the Faculty of Engineering was inaugurated in 1991. The programme emphasizes both computer hardware and software design. It offers courses in the areas of computer interfacing, embedded systems, very large-scale integration circuit design (VLSI), computer-aided design and microprocessor systems.
The data-driven era creates strong interests and needs of analyzing, storing, distributing, and sharing massive amounts of data using sophisticated data analytics and machine learning algorithms and methodologies, with applications in multiple disciplines including science, social science, finance, public health, medicine, engineering, and telecommunications. We have already witnessed a huge job demand of data analysts in both local and global employment markets. However, how to design proper data-driven solutions for analyzing and reasoning about massive information remains a non-trivial challenge, since it requires the in-depth knowledge of both computing and statistical methodologies for problem solving, data collection, data modeling and analysis, and scientific experimental design.
Our programme, through the synergy of the strengths of the Department of Computer Science and Engineering and the Department of Statistics, focuses on the in-depth academic trainings in the domain of computational data science. It aims to equip students with the capabilities of applying both (1) high-performance parallel and distributed computing for massive data management and (2) data-driven theories and methodologies for mining patterns and making predictions from large and complex datasets, backed by rigorous foundations of data structures and algorithms, statistical modeling and analysis, as well as parallel and distributed computing system programming. Such capabilities enable students to develop cutting-edge massive data analytics and management solutions that are of practical interest to academics, industry, and society.
In particular, our programme features a solid inter-disciplinary curriculum that includes cohesive efforts across the departments in the Faculty of Engineering and the Faculty of Science; it can be viewed as a “Computer Science/Statistics + X” programme. Its core curriculum blends the fundamentals of computer science and statistics from the courses offered by the Department of Computer Science and Engineering and the Department of Statistics. In addition, it offers several specializations (i.e., the X component) that apply the core knowledge of computational data science to different science, engineering, and medicine disciplines, including (a) Computational Data Science, (b) Computational Physics, (c) Computational Medicine, and (d) Computational Social Science.